I'm sick of hearing people lament about how quickly time passes, because I really don't think that it does. I do think, however, that the predominant strategies for organizing your schedule, "maximizing" your time, and increasing your productivity, ironically make it _feel_ like time passes quickly. And I'm here to suggest that disconnecting from these ideas and instead focusing on novelty is not only more fun, but is the best remedy for that "time is slipping away" feeling.

Your brain processes an inconcievable amount of information at a truly staggering rate. It does this from the day you are born till your death, with relatively few breaks in between (especially in todays non-stop content buffet). To manage this overwhelming influx of content, it runs a constant filtering operation to hold on to what it needs and discard the rest. But how does it choose?

One primary methodology, among many others, is simply to hold on to novel information with more detail than all the rest. This is simple optimization - if it's the first time you're seeing a tree, open the filters - soak in the detail! - take in every curve and line and burn it into your memory. If it's the five millionth time you're seeing a tree, well, is it even worth remembering at all?

Don't take my word for it, please, do your own research. But as far as I've seen, studies have robustly proven that novel stimulation promotes memory both in humans and animals. And, conveniently, I think most people will annecdotally find this true as well. We remember the firsts far better than the fifths, or the thousands, or ten-thousandths, for that matter. It is this fact that makes the push for routine an unintentional trojan horse and a sugar-coating for a very dangerous pill.

For the most part, we all want more time. A cursory search on the internet for solutions will turn up many a self-help blog, and the majority tout some form of routine as a critical pillar. On the surface it makes sense: without pulling out a study, I think it's safe to say that doing the same things each day will certainly reduce the mental load required to execute those tasks. But is that _really_ what we want?

This ease in executing a task appears, to me, proportional to the likelihood of remembering it. So we are presented with a choice: expend more effort in everything we do, but remember it; or, expend less effort and don't. By definition, routine leans into the latter, though, obviously, no sane routine recommends the _exact_ same thing each day. But many sing the benefits of dedicating all your energy to a few crucial tasks per day, inadvertadly relegate the majority of your day to your "automated" state (and, therefore, commiting only a few small moments each day to your memory).

I can't tell you which strategy to employ when, and I think the art of life is choosing that for oneself. But I implore you to pick carefully! As Nick Shackleton-Jones writes in his excellent book _How People Learn_:

> There are many things that can shorten your life: drink, drugs, obesity, and cigarettes. But the one that will do the most damage by far is routine... imagine that your life was so terribly routine that every single day was pretty much the same. As a result, at the end of your life, you’d have only lived one day... It is as if, during our life, we retain only a handful of snapshots of what we’ve lived. The highlights.

If you live in routine and constantly ask yourself where the time is going: try the other end of the pool! New experiences, change, the unexpected, these are all things we as humans naturally fear. This is your brain optimizing! Much in the same way that you must fight the urge to eat foods filled with sugar and fat all day, you must also temper your drive to live in the deceptive comfort of sameness. Your brain is here to keep you alive, not to keep you happy. Shackleton-Jones goes on to say:

> Novelty and emotional intensity work hand in hand to create lasting memories... Emotionally charged experiences lead to richer encoding, which in turn distorts our memory of them [to feel longer]. Live a dull life, your life shrinks.

I'm no expert, and I'm not here to tell you that this is "the way". In fact, it's harder to live like this than to live in routine. But, I can tell you that when everyone around me seems to say "wow, the time goes so fast", I simply don't feel the same way.

To clarify further, I don't live in some purely novel, overly-romantic, sudo-cowboy-fantasy where I never walk the same steps twice, and this method doesn't require you to travel to distant lands or eat out at a new restauraunt for every meal. Instead, I simply maximize my novel experiences whenever possible: try a new food; take a different route to work; sit at a new table at your favorite restauraunt; wake up at a different time, go to bed later or earlier; tell the barista a different name; park in a different spot; re-organize your room.

These might seem silly, but try it and tell me that you don't remember these moments better than the last hundred times you sat in the same spot, ordered the same dish, and went to bed at the same time! We've already read today - why not write something new tomorrow?
